monty-genetics
==============

A simulation of random sequencing and allele-specific heredity

## Questions ##

1. Can one sort reads into mom vs. dad via MSA and tree?
2. Can one identify heterozygosity in a column via a pattern of counts?
3. Determine if an MSA contains hets and label reads with parent

## Preamble ##

Sequencing a child results in sequencing reads that differ from each
other due to 2 forces.

- Source: the DNA could come from mother or father
- Error: the DNA may contain sequencing errors

Determining if a read comes from mom or dad requires finding variation
that is more likely to be due to heterozygosity than sequencing error.

## 1. Decoding with Multiple Alignment and Tree ##

Task: create a program that generates fake sequencing reads from mom and
dad. Determine if these can be differentiated from each other via
multiple alignment and tree.

Program: `tree-experiment.py`

Result: Sort of works. Most reads are clustered well, but the whole tree
does not result in 2 branches with mom on one side and dad on the other.

## 2. Decoding with Count Distribution ##

Task: create a program that generates fake columns from a MSA where the
MSA was generated by either (a) homozygous parent or (b) heterozygous
parent. Both sequencing error and random sampling affect the counts of
each letter. Determine how often any pattern occurs in homozygous vs.
heterozygous. For example, the pattern `6.3.1` means that among 10
sequencing reads, the most common letter was seen 6 times. The 2nd most
was seen 3 times, and the 3rd most 1 time. One of the letters was not
seen at all. The homozygous model generates this about 3304526 times in
a billion whereas the heterozygous is 118187590. The result is that
seeing `6.3.1` has a 2.72% chance of being homozygous.

Program: `hvh.py` and `run-hvh.py`

Result: At low coverage, it's difficult to determine if any column is
homozygous or heterozygous, but as coverage increases, it gets more
reliable.

